Hi, I'm Norman Wildberger, and today we're going
to talk, as part of our foundation of mathematics
series, about the greatest single discovery
and innovation in the history of mathematics
and science put together. It is the Hindu-Arabic
number system that is currently taught to students
everywhere around the world. Let me remind you
that our approach so far to numbers has been as
a string of ones. So, a natural number is just a
string of ones, and it's a sequence that carries
on endlessly like this. It becomes pretty clear
when we're working with numbers this way that
larger and larger numbers become awkward to deal
with, and every civilization has had to innovate
to find ways of shortening these large numbers.
So, we're going to talk today about a precursor
to the Hindu-Arabic system: the Roman numeral
system. And that's a natural stepping stone from
this sort of primitive basic understanding
of numbers to the one we currently have.
Alright, so the idea, for so long, to go to
the Roman system—and this is a simplified Roman
system, not the full one that they used—is to
introduce other symbols for larger denominations.
Just as in commerce, we don't want to run the
economy using $1 bills; we also want $10 bills,
$100 bills, $1,000 bills if necessary. So, the
Romans introduced new symbols for larger numbers
of ones and larger numbers of other numbers. So,
the basic step is to take ten ones, a string of
10 ones, and call it 10, and we denote that by the
symbol X. Then we agree that if we have 10 X's or
10 tens, we denote that by the symbol C, calling
it a hundred. Ten hundreds are denoted with an M,
called a thousand, and we can introduce further
symbols if we want to. So now the idea is,
instead of having a huge string of
ones, we group those ones into tens,
and then we group the tens into hundreds,
and we group the hundreds into thousands,
and so on. So, we can write a number like
this: two M's, four C's, five ones—that
would be the number 2405. In this case, there
are no tens in that number, and we agree that
when we do this, we're going to list the bigger
denominations first: thousands, hundreds, tens,
and then ones. And that's any ten symbols of
the same kind replaced by a bigger symbol. So,
we're not allowed to have ten or eleven or twelve
C's in a row; we would then agree that we're going
to replace 10 of those C's with an M, or any
ten X's are replaced by a C. So that means that
effectively the maximum number of symbols that we
have in a row in such an expression is nine. This
is the simplified Roman numeral system which
was in use for, of course, thousands of years,
and it serves as a very good shortcut to
our basic understanding of natural numbers.
Alright, so the Indian mathematicians introduced
a couple of key innovations. What they did is they
first of all had names and symbols for all the
numbers between what we call now 1 and 9: 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. And more importantly, we
have these symbols to represent them. So, these
are just new symbols; they're somewhat arbitrary,
it doesn't really matter which ones we use,
but we agree to use these ones. These symbols
represent these strings of ones. In addition,
we're also going to need to have a new symbol for
nothing. So, the new symbol called zero, denoted
by a circle, stands for nothing. And now the idea
of the Hindu-Arabic number system is very simple:
we take a natural number expressed in Roman form
like this, and what we do is we record the number
of units of each size starting from the right. So,
we record how many ones there are. In this case,
there are five ones, so we write down a five.
Then we go to tens: how many tens are there?
There are zero tens. In this case, we write down
a zero. There are four hundreds; we write down
a four. There are two thousands; we write down
a two. So, this represents this Roman numeral,
which, of course, represents a huge string of ones
with two thousand four hundred and five ones. So,
the key innovation here is first of all that
we are only using the numbers from zero to nine
in each place because there's at most nine of
any string allowed. If there were ten or more,
we would replace it with one of the next bigger.
And the second is that we're allowed to use zero
to hold the place, in other words, to record the
number of denominations at that particular size.
Zero tens, in this case, is very important. So, we
keep the ones, tens, hundreds, and thousands all
straight. The Hindu-Arabic number system allows
us to deal with large numbers very effectively,
and one of the interesting innovations is
that powers of 10 become important. So,
the first new symbol is this one: zero, which
stands for zero ones and one ten. That's our
new symbol for the actual number ten, no longer
X. One hundred, which is zero ones, zero tens,
and one hundred, is now represented by this
expression: 100. And we also can write it as
ten times ten or ten squared. In the same way,
we have a thousand represented by ten cubed—ten
times ten times ten. Ten thousand: ten to the
fourth. One hundred thousand: ten to the fifth.
And one million: ten to the sixth. And we could
keep on going. So, if we have a number like 327,
what that is really, in terms of tens, is there
are seven ones, two tens, and three hundreds. So,
we can always rewrite a number like this, if
we need to, as multiples of powers of ten.
So, what are the advantages of the
Hindu-Arabic number system? Well,
first of all, it's very compact. Secondly, it
simplifies arithmetic dramatically. In ancient
times, only very well-educated people could
hope to do simple multiplications, and even
most reasonably complicated multiplications
could only be done approximately because
of the cumbersome nature of the Roman and
other systems. With Hindu-Arabic arithmetic,
even young people in primary school can learn
how to multiply big numbers by hand, and that's
an important skill. It allows approximation in a
very effective way, and we'll talk about that when
we extend the Hindu-Arabic system to decimals.
This is a key point in the importance of this
system for scientific work. So, this is really
a fabulous innovation. One can't overestimate
how important this was to the modern world. Next
time, we're going to talk about how arithmetic is
transformed using this system. I hope you'll join
me. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
Let me know if you need any further assistance!